Whenever there is a conflict in the
Gulf, people instinctively look to oil.
That's where the first signs of trouble
show up in tanker traffic, shipping
routes, and fuel prices. But, the real
vulnerability lies somewhere else
entirely. The water people consume
doesn't come naturally. It has to be
produced.
Along the coastline, desalination plants
operate day and night, turning seawater
into something people can actually use.
Cities like Dubai, Abu Dhabi, and Doha
depend on them completely. The Al Dur
plant in Bahrain, for instance, supplies
water to over 1 million people each day.
The Ras Al Khair plant in Saudi Arabia
produces even more. There are hundreds
of such facilities across the GCC, but
systems like these leave little room for
disruption.
This diplomatic cable from 2009 puts
things into perspective. The assessment
warns that the Jubail desalination
system supplies more than 90% of
Riyadh's drinking water, and that if the
facility, its pipelines, or even its
power supply were taken out, the Saudi
government would have just days to
evacuate the population of its capital.
That evaluation is from 17 years ago,
and since then, reliance on desalinated
water has only grown. But, there is
still no backup plan in case things go
wrong.
Water isn't stored in large reserves,
and it can't be easily rerouted from
elsewhere. If the desalination plants
are targeted, there is no easy way to
replace what they produce. Until
recently, this single point of failure
was understood and left alone. But now,
that's starting to change. Two plants
have been hit so far, and even though
the damage is modest, a precedent has
been set. The longer hostilities last,
the more likely it is that water becomes
part of the conflict. And once that
happens, everything changes for the
worse. Because unlike oil, where shocks
break balance sheets, shocks to water
supply break societies."
Meanwhile, the Houthis have now entered
the war and launched a missile strike on
Israel. Over 300 sources have picked up
the story, but making sense of it is
frustrating because, depending on the
source, I end up with a completely
different version of events. This is
exactly why I use Ground News, today's
sponsor. They're the best tool for
staying objective in my reporting.
Ground News lets me instantly see how
the coverage splits. Many left-leaning
outlets focus on the global shipping
angle, while most right-leaning sources
frame it as a direct threat to Israel.
Same story, two different realities. But
with Ground News, I cut through that
because they pull in coverage from local
and international sources and put it in
one easy-to-read feed, letting me
quickly see every angle of the story and
get to the truth. And the color-coded
layout makes it easy to filter for high
factuality sources, see political bias,
or filter for the geographic origin of
each source. On developing stories like
this, Ground News provides clarity you
don't find anywhere else.
Because I believe in Ground News so
much, we're offering you 40% off the
same Vantage plan that I use for my
research. Just click the link in the
description or go to
ground.news/caspian.
It's one of the the discounts they've
ever offered.
The Gulf is one of the world's driest
regions. There are no permanent rivers
and rainfall is too limited to support
large populations. Historically, ground
water and seasonal waterways helped fill
the gap, but as cities expanded and
populations grew, these sources were
steadily depleted or degraded. The
United Nations defines absolute water
scarcity as less than 500 cubic meters
per person per year. However, in Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, Oman,
and the UAE, the average is just 120
cubic meters.
To call this a water scarcity problem
would be an understatement. These
countries, home to more than 62 million
people, rely on desalination for their
survival, though not to the same extent.
In Saudi Arabia, it accounts for about
18% of the total water supply compared
to 41% in the UAE and as much as 61% in
Qatar. However, these numbers include
industry and agriculture. For drinking
water alone, desalination supplies
around 80% across the GCC.
At its most basic level, desalination is
the process of removing salt from sea
water to produce fresh water. The most
widely used method is reverse osmosis,
in which sea water is pushed through
membranes at high pressure. These
membranes allow water to pass through
while blocking salt and other
impurities. The water then goes through
a post-treatment phase, where minerals
are added back and it is disinfected to
make it safe for drinking.
Another method is thermal distillation,
where sea water is heated until it
evaporates, leaving the salt behind. The
vapor is then cooled and condensed into
fresh water before going through the
same post treatment process.
Both methods are simple in concept, but
they are quite energy intensive and must
run continuously. Large pumps are needed
to maintain pressure and the equipment
must be maintained and replaced over
time. All this must happen without any
intervals or interruptions because the
demand for water never stops.
Over time, the technology improved and
the system scaled to support entire
societies with Gulf states now producing
around 30% of the world's desalinated
water. Most of these plants are located
along the coast where sea water can be
accessed directly. The GCC nations have
over 400 of them.
However, the setup of this system is
just as important. Since desalination
requires a large amount of energy, these
plants are closely tied to power
generation. In many cases, water and
electricity are produced in parallel,
which means disruptions in one area can
affect the other. This creates a system
where everything is connected. If the
power supply is interrupted, water
production stops. If a component fails,
the process slows down or halts until
it's repaired. So, at its core,
desalination is built for continuous
operation under stable conditions. It's
not meant to be turned on and off
repeatedly.
The Gulf states do have water storage,
but it's limited. Water is held in
reservoirs and distribution networks,
but these aren't designed to sustain
long interruptions. In Saudi Arabia, for
example, strategic reserves near Riyadh
amount to nearly 11 million cubic
meters, which is enough to last only
several days.
At best, the GCC nations can manage
short disruptions and even the temporary
loss of a single plant, but not
prolonged outages. The whole system
depends on a steady flow rather than
large reserves. If multiple plants are
disrupted at the same time, control
begins to break down. Each facility
serves a defined area, and there is only
so much flexibility in redirecting
supply. There are some emergency
measures that can be used.
For example, water can be transported by
truck, and bottled supplies can be
distributed where needed. But these are
stopgap solutions. They cannot sustain
entire cities, let alone replace
continuous production at scale. In
short, there is no contingency plan for
if desalination production goes down.
Under normal conditions, desalination
plants operate quite reliably and
provide a steady supply to large,
densely populated urban areas. But that
flow hinges on stability and continuity.
When those conditions hold, the system
works as intended, but the war with Iran
is increasingly undermining that
foundation. If desalination plants come
under attack, and that becomes the new
normal, there will be no fallback.
Everything goes down with them. The Arab
states would stop functioning within
days.
At the outset of hostilities, the focus
was largely predictable. Military
installations, air defense systems, and
nuclear-related facilities were struck
first, followed by energy infrastructure
and shipping routes.
But on March 7th, the scope of the
attacks widened. A desalination plant on
Iran's Qeshm Island was struck, which
briefly disrupted water supply to
roughly 30 villages. The damage was not
extensive, but it may well be one of the
first instances of a desalination plant
being deliberately targeted in a
conflict, and more importantly, it set a
dangerous benchmark.
Shortly after, a desalination facility
in Bahrain was hit by a drone strike.
Just like in Qeshm, the damage was
modest and the facility as a whole
continued to function. But the fact that
a desalination plant was targeted at all
changes what was once considered
off-limits. This is precisely how
escalation plays out. It doesn't happen
all at once. It builds over time. Once a
specific category is targeted, it
becomes easier to target again.
Desalination plants and water
infrastructure as a whole are now
steadily entering that process. The
restraint that existed a month ago is
now less certain.
What's more, the strategic balance cuts
in Iran's favor. Across the Arabian
Peninsula, millions of people depend
almost entirely on desalinated water.
Iran, by contrast, while it has severe
water problems of its own, still draws
most of its water from reservoirs and
groundwater. Desalination accounts for
only a small fraction of Iran's supply.
This asymmetry matters because it means
that any escalation against water
infrastructure would not be felt evenly.
For the Arab states, desalination is a
lifeline. For Iran, it is a supplement.
And in a war where vulnerability defines
leverage, that puts the initiative
firmly on Iran's side.
Even if desalination plants are not
targeted directly, they remain highly
exposed. Damage to surrounding
infrastructure can be just as
disruptive. Many of these facilities
draw seawater, which means contamination
at the intake can shut them down as
effectively as a direct strike. An oil
spill near a plant, for example, can
clog filtration systems, contaminate
pipelines, and bring operations to a
halt.
And this isn't some far-fetched
hypothetical. In 1991, during the Gulf
War, Iraqi forces released millions of
barrels of oil into the sea.
US officials at the time assessed that
the spill was intended to
desalination capacity and complicate a
potential amphibious invasion. The spill
created a massive oil slick stretching
over 15 km and led to a month-long
effort to keep it from reaching a
desalination plant that supplied Riyadh
with drinking water. The point is, if
water becomes part of the war, it won't
be just another target. It will redefine
the war itself.
By the way, this video is not a policy
recommendation. We are not suggesting
attacks on water infrastructure. That is
not what this channel is about. The only
reason we're bringing this up is that
too many people have grown comfortable
with the idea of war without fully
thinking through what it actually
entails. Once governments climb the
ladder of escalation, it will not
necessarily stop where people expect it
to.
Should Iran begin targeting desalination
plants across the Gulf, the Arab states
would retaliate immediately and
ferociously. They would have no choice.
These systems sustain daily life, and so
the response would be driven as much by
necessity as by deterrence.
At that stage, the Gulf states would be
in direct open conflict with Iran.
Hostilities would move beyond controlled
strikes and spiral into a cycle of
retaliation with each side attacking
what the other cannot afford to lose.
The damage would cut both ways. Iran
would be hit just as hard and millions
would be left without a way out. It
would be nothing short of a catastrophe
and push the periphery toward a new dark
age.
That doomsday scenario has so far been
kept at bay precisely because everyone
understands the ramifications.
But that stalemate depends on restraint
and in war restraint is rarely
permanent.
I've been your host Shirvan from Caspian
Report. If you enjoy these videos,
consider supporting the channel on
Patreon and click the bell icon so the
next one doesn't slip past you. Thank
you for your time and salaam.